Let me set this up here. Brief biographical sketch
of yourself and your schooling.
Do I need to give my name and everything? Sure. OK.
Name's Sterling Wheeler. Brief biographical
sketch, starting with schooling only. Sounds OK.
Just schooling at Texas A&E. I've got my
bachelor's in environmental design there in 77.
Received my master's in urban planning in 79. And
to
give you history before that, I was born and raised
in South Texas, Corpus Christi. And
then after my schooling, I ended up in Dallas. And
I've been here a year and a half.
Basically, there's not a whole lot to say. OK.
Which of these questions do you think you could
best cover? How about number nine? Do you know how
many planters are now employed? That fluctuates
somewhat. I could check on that. I have to go ask our
clerk.
You want me to go check on that now? I could get that
for you. The department, I think, has around 80
people, but I don't know how many of those are
professionals. at
least 40 to 50, somewhere in there, but I can get an
exact number. We've had a couple people leave
recently. Three people leave. Okay. Is there any
systematic periodic review of your city's comp
plan? We don't have a comp plan, and therefore
there's no periodic review. Okay, so... Then...
Obviously, since your city does not conduct
comprehensive planning, how would you
characterize this planning stuff?
For example, incremental or radical? What is
radical planning?
That's a .
I guess it's incremental planning. We are
reactionary. We don't really plan for problems.
If a problem occurs or an issue comes up, we then
initiate a study. Most of our studies are
initiated through either the planning
commission stating that there's a problem.
Therefore, you, the planning department, have to
study the problem and come up with
recommendations. And that usually comes out of
zoning cases, sometimes subdivision cases, but
seldom subdivision cases. Or the city council
thinks there's a problem. And they tell the
planning commission, who relays it to us, we do a
study. Or we see there's a problem and we ask the
planning commission if we can initiate a study, or
we initiate it on our own. An example is our only
adopted land use plan, which is the Kleberg
Community. plan, which that's the first plan I
worked on when I came here. It was initiated when
the city consolidated with the former city of
Kleberg. We had to solve some zoning questions.
Kleberg had its own zoning ordinance. As part of
the state statute of consolidation, you have to
adopt that city's ordinances for a period of time
during a transition period. So we adopted
Kleberg's ordinance. And it wasn't real
compatible with the Dallas ordinance, so we
conducted a land use study to determine proper
zoning of the area. So we did a little land use
study, got citizen participation,
As a result, we had a land use plan. And based on the
land use plan, we developed a zoning proposal and
changed Kleberg zoning to Dallas zoning,
essentially.
That's basically how we operate. It's
reactionary.
We really don't have any type of comprehensive or
long-range outlook at this time. We would like to,
and our work program was geared into developing a
comprehensive plan over the next three years. But
we had some budget, severe budget cuts this past
year. I think we lost $150,000 out of our budget,
resulting in losing three positions. So that sort
of put us off of our three-year timetable of
getting something out. And what even makes it look
a little worse in terms of if we're going to get a
comprehensive plan out is this upcoming tax
referendum, which might totally not abolish the
planning department, but severely cut it.
I haven't directly answered that. that question
but we really don't do any comprehensive planning
at this time but we do, that's one of our objectives
is to eventually get into a comprehensive
planning process. But right now it's not feasible
from a political standpoint
and from a budgetary standpoint it's probably not
feasible because We have too many little
short-range projects that we're given, which
really doesn't allow us to have a long-range
viewpoint that we're trying.
I'll reword this question a bit. What
administrative procedures and planning program
elements does your community have for
implementing? We don't have a community plan,
just planning. Which one? Seven. Seven?
Program elements are
the departments organized, I think, in six or
seven divisions, and each one is considered a
program. My division is land use and public
facilities.
In this program, we usually try to handle all the
land use issues that are broad in nature, affect an
area of the community like North Dallas,
an area larger than what's considered a
neighborhood. Then we have another program area,
neighborhood and community development. That
handles the department's involvement in CD
monies, which basically spin on doing
neighborhood studies. Then we have urban design
and the environment section, which is Tom
Niederhauer's section. And that handles all the
historical designation
processing.
It staffs some environmental committee. I'm not
familiar with what it is, the actual title. It
staffs the sign board. Well, I think that's been
shifted. The sign board has been shifted to Zoning
and Development Administration. That's another
program aspect. The Zoning and Development
Administration is basically our processing
division, where it processes zoning cases,
subdivision cases, Board of Adjustment cases,
floodplain fill applications,
signed Board of Adjustment.
Then we have an Economic Analysis Division. which
basically handles our computer work, where we're
putting together a database, looking at how, or
utilizing the database we have in the city, like
looking at the tax file, seeing how we can utilize
that, the building permit file, getting it in a
format that we can use, taking other departments'
information and trying to build up a database that
we can use. easily so we can punch in some
information and get it out in a form that we can use.
So in terms of program elements, it sort of matches
up with our divisional organization.
Have I answered your question or am I beating
around the bush? Yeah, I think so. What
organizational structure do you have in its
relationship with the, you mentioned it just then
about the different program elements, but the
relationship with the city council or other
legislative body? And how is the relationship
with the city council? Okay, we have no direct
relationship with the city council. It's in the
city charter that staff cannot directly
communicate with the city council. The only
communication directly with the city council
that's allowed is through the city manager.
We are allowed
direct communication with the city planning
commission. But usually that communication is
usually transferred through a program manager or
an assistant director or the director. It's
usually not a staff individual. The only cases
where the individual staff that has the most
communication in our department with the
planning commission are the zoning planners. And
they
basically present each zoning case to the
planning commission.
And the only time other staff members have
communication with the Planning Commission is
when they work with them on subcommittees. We have
a zoning ordinance review committee, which has
one or two commission members on it. We have a new
inner city committee looking at inner city
issues. There's one or two commission members on
that. That's the only time we really get direct
contact with commission members. So it's sort of a
formal structure, whereas We communicate with
our program manager who communicates with the
assistant director and director, and the
assistant director and directors have basic
communication with the planning commission and
the manager's office. Sort of a hierarchy.
Whereas there is communication every once in a
while in between individual staff members and the
planning commission, but it's not very often.
Like I just recently gave a presentation to the
planning commission, and one of them asked if I was
new, because they never saw me. They only see about
10 different people regularly in the department,
and some of them assume that's basically it.
That's the whole department, those people they
see once a week. Because I've been here a year and a
half, and this lady said, oh, are you new? Where
have you been? So in
terms of organizations, pretty formal in terms of
who has direct contact with the people higher up.
Because the city is rather large. Our
department's rather large. And you can't have
every member in the department having contact
with every member of the planning commission. It
would create chaos. And that'd be mixed stories.
One staff member would have an opinion, and he'd
express that opinion to a commission member, and
the commission member would take that as the
department's position when it's not. So that
would lead to problems if you didn't have that
formal line of communication, whereas
communication usually comes through very few
people to the higher level. What's the present
city council's reaction to planning, if you know
what I mean? I've read many a North Dallas issue.
Overall, I don't think they're very responsive.
There's a few members that seem to be, like Sid
Stahl seems to want planning, wants a
comprehensive plan. I think the council's sort of
divided now.
They have divided interest. I think we're in a
transition from a developer or
business-oriented council to a people-oriented
council. Or maybe not a people-oriented council,
but a district-oriented council, because we just
recently changed over to single-member
districts. whereas most of the council members
are looking out after their constituency, which
is sometimes a minority constituency, like
Medrano's constituency is probably mostly
ethnics. I can't state that as facts, but I think
it's sort of dividing the city up into areas and
creating a lot of little squabbles that wouldn't
have occurred if all the council members were at
large. It is changing the structure of the council
and its relationship to the business community,
but still the council is very strongly associated
with the business community because Paulson's a
big developer in town and he's the mayor. It's sort
of a traditional pattern that the council would be
business-oriented or development-oriented.
pro-development oriented. It's not to say
development's bad, it's just it's probably bad
when the decision makers are all biased when
they're making a decision.
So it's really hard to tell
the direction they're going to take in terms of
planning. There are too many unknowns that
elections coming up, Folsom isn't running for
re-election. If we get a strong mayor in there
that's people-oriented, it'll probably change
the outlook tremendously.
Then again, we don't know what's going to happen in
the tax referendum. If that passes, even if we do
get a council that is pro-planning, we're not
going to be able to do any planning because we're
not going to have the staff.
That is, I assume we're not going to have the staff.
So it's really hard to tell where we're going to be
going until after January 17th, or 18th, whenever
that election is. 17. 17. Why don't
we skip down to the last question? You mentioned
the history part would be hard for you to cover,
which would be mostly what 11 is. And you've
answered what the current status of planning is in
the city. How about the role of outside
consultants in planning?
I really don't know how much impact outside
consultants have. Anytime we get a controversial
issue, it seems that we bring in a consultant to do a
study instead of staff handling it. In many cases,
it's not always. I really haven't had that much
experience with consultants while I've been
here. Everything I've worked on, we haven't had a
consultant. I came in at the tail end of one
consultant study and took it through. That was
Babcock did an analysis of our zoning ordinance.
And one aspect of that was analysis of our parking
standards in the zoning ordinance. And as a result
of that, one of my functions when I first got here
was to staffed the zoning advisory committee and
put together some recommendations based on
Babcock's parking study or parking analysis.
In most cases, we disagreed with what Babcock did.
That was the poorest part of his study.
But I really don't know how involved consultants
have been with the city. Tom Niederhammer would
know. He probably already told Cornish what their
involvement is because he's worked quite a bit
with people like Kevin Lynch, who did our sign
ordinance and worked with our sign ordinance
committee. So Tom would have a better viewpoint of
how the role of consultants have affected
planning in Dallas. OK, how about on question
number 12, these influences? You mentioned the
political influence or the business
orientation. Have you noticed any religious
influences which affected planning for you? I
really don't think there has been significant
religious influences on planning.
I think political is probably the biggest current
influence on where planning will go. Geographic
influence had probably been the strongest in
determining the urban form in Dallas in terms of
why Dallas came about, why Dallas occurred here,
and why it grew. It's significant now in terms of
being a regional center.
It was significant back in the 1800s because this
was the narrowest crossing of the Trinity within
100 miles. That's the reason why Bryan came here in
the first place. It's probably the reason why the
railroads were enclosed to come here. Also
because of some bribery that went on and stuff.
Which all these things added up to Dallas growing.
It has regional significance. So I think that's
important in its early development and its
current status as being a regional distribution
center for goods. It's probably the reason why the
World Trade Center out here is doing so well. The
reason why it can compete with New York in terms of
marketing fashion and stuff because of its
centralized location.
So the most important effect on planning is
political.
Geographic location is important as far as its
early development.
I'm not too familiar with sociological effects or
ethnic effects.
groups are a political force, so they relate to the
political climate. But I don't know about what
their effects on planning is, other than they're
sort of skeptical.
Anytime we'd go into an area, that's dominated by
an ethnic group, they're very skeptical of what
we're doing because they see us as being the big
city and seeing us as a foe because we've done so
many bad things to them in the past, putting
freeways through the middle of their
neighborhoods. They're afraid that we're going
to go in there and tear down their whole area and
they won't have any place to live. And that was one
of the reasons why the... ICP plan, the Interim
Comprehensive Plans, failed because you
couldn't get the minority support. And the
minorities were the ones to benefit from a
planning effort.
So I guess they do affect planning somewhat. If
they're not receptive to planning, the planning
probably won't occur because you need citizen
support or the planning effort, and the citizen
support relates directly to political climate,
like if there's strong citizen support in the
planning department doing something, it's more
than likely that the politicians will be somewhat
in favor of what we're doing.
And that's one reason why any time we do a land use
study, or most of the time we go out and try to put
together some citizen participation, have a
community meeting, elect a task force to work with
us so we can go through the public hearing process,
have citizens there that worked with us as
evidence that we were out in the community working
with the citizens and that we have their support.
It's much easier to get things through. So I guess
if you're working in an area that's composed of
minorities, you're going to have to have their
support more than likely. to get a plan through, if
it's a neighborhood or community plan. Do you see
any military influences anywhere? From my
experiences in Fort Worth, it's pretty much now.
Well, in the early 60s and 70s, there was a bomb in
enforcement. It's dying out now. Do you see any in
the Dallas area? I don't know if there has been or
not. I'd say currently there isn't any. We do have a
naval base out way on the... Grand Prairie. Yeah,
it's in our city limits, but essentially it's
surrounded by Grand Prairie. But I don't see that
as a big influence on the city of Dallas. It's way
out there on the edge. I don't know what kind of
impact it has had. I think that's the only military
installation in the city that I know of. How about
the... What do you see as the big economic
influence in the area? now and in the coming
future? I think the one thing that has had a major
economic influence on the city and its direction
of growth is the creation of DFW.
That has strengthened the growth to the
northwest. That's the only area the city's really
growing in. Look at a growth corridor. We're
growing in between here and north out of Dallas.
And if that airport wasn't built, I don't think
you'd be seeing that kind of growth. I don't think
north Dallas would have grown as it did because it
seems to be correlated to DFW being built. But I
can't say that's a fact. I'm not. that familiar
with regional economics. That's just a general
observation. Well, has the city of Dallas come up
with, I shouldn't say a plan, but some way of attack
to maybe stop some of the growth moving out of the
city? Because Plano is on the up and all the other
suburbs to the north. Yeah.
We started the North Dallas study with
cooperation from the surrounding cities in that
area. I think there's seven cities that were
involved. And one of the objectives in that study
was to limit development rights. Like our zoning
ordinance is too liberal. They can build very
intense development under current zoning. In
certain areas up there are O2 districts and MF2.
districts of pretty high densities. One of the
objectives was to have the zoning ordinance
correlate to current average development,
because development intensity increases as it
starts to be building out. As land becomes more
valuable, you have to build more units per acre,
more square footage of office or retail per acre.
So they wanted to try to put a ceiling on that. and
put a ceiling on it just above the current average
development and not the current allowable
development. However, the other cities didn't
want to cooperate with doing that. So that fell
through. That was one objective of the North
Dallas study. But that never happened. And
cooperation with other cities broke down. The
problem here is it's regional in nature. You have
so many jurisdictions involved. If one city
tightened up their development standards, the
development would just go to one of the other
cities. It would encourage development to go
further north instead of go elsewhere in the city.
So the only way you can accomplish a goal of cutting
back development densities is for all the cities
in the area to cooperate. whereas they're not
really cooperating. Each one wants to get as much
development and thereby get as much revenues as
possible from what's happening up there. They
want all their fair share or more than their fair
share. So everybody's in competition,
essentially, with the other. They're just not
going to do anything to stop the growth. They're
going to try to encourage it. And the result is
massive transportation problems.
And that was another objective of the North Dallas
study to solve some of the transportation
problems up there.
But you can't solve transportation problems in
this little portion of Dallas when you have
impacts coming from three sides that you don't
have control over. So all the planning department
can essentially do is analyze the problem,
project traffic volumes, and determine how much
money is needed to meet that future demand. And it
ends up that it's in the hundreds of millions of
dollars in that one 30 square mile area. I'm not
real familiar on the facts and figures of North
Dallas because I didn't work on it. But in terms of
planning, our role is Basically, we analyze the
situation. We tell the decision makers what are
the implications of what's happening and what we
expect to happen.
And not in terms, or at least we haven't yet
formulated a plan for the area. We do have various
land use concepts formulated. And under each
scenario, we have the impacts of each scenario in
terms of traffic volumes, in terms of dollars, and
transportation improvements. But it's really up
in the hands of the decision makers whether or not
and when in RF we're going to ever put those kind of
improvements up there. We know we're going to need
them to solve the congestion problems. But the
other side of the coin is that people can live with
congestion or that when it becomes so congested,
the development will go elsewhere, will go
further north.
There's no easy way to put a cap on that growth. And
we can't divert it to other areas of Dallas. We
could have 20 years ago if we had stronger
planning.
But we didn't. I think a lot of that growth could
have gone elsewhere. But it got started up there.
Like three years ago, no one expected that kind of
thing to happen that quickly.
As far as planning is concerned, we really can't
control it or direct it. We can just monitor it.
Stay one step behind it. Monitor it and analyze
implications from what's happening currently,
gear our bond programs to address those problems.
But there's going to come a point where other
citizens in Dallas are going to probably vote such
bond programs down because we're sinking all this
money up in that one area and they're going to feel
like they're being ignored or politically at some
point there's not going to be the money put up there
that's necessary for those improvements in my
opinion so you're going to probably have a very
long term problem up there
It could be that areas up there, if congestion gets
too bad and there's no money to solve the problem,
certain businesses due to congestion might fail
and might move further north or someplace else.
There's a potential problem up there, all kinds of
problems to solve.
Would you like a copy of any of these papers?